---
layout: page
title: On the Surprising Connection between Mountain Waves and Storm-induced Near-Inertial Waves (NIWs)
description: " "
img: assets/img/NIW_img.png
importance: 1
category: work
related_publications: true
math: true
---

When wind encounters a mountain, it is forced upward. In a stable atmosphere, this stream of rising air would cool and become denser than the environmenta. Eventually, gravity acting on these air parcels serve as a restoring force, pulling the denser air back down and triggering an oscillatary wave in the atmosphere known as an orographic gravity wave. While the forcing of the wave is at the surface, they can extend from the peak through the entire depth of the atmosphere.
As these waves propagate upward, they lean into the incoming wind. This specific "upwind" tilt creates a pressure imbalance—high pressure on the windward side and low pressure on the leeward side—generating a physical force called mountain drag. Essentially, the mountain exerts a "braking" effect on the atmosphere, which transports momentum from the ground to high altitudes where the waves eventually break and slow down large-scale winds, making them a critical component for accurate weather and climate forecasting.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/MountainWave.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Orographic gravity wave generated by a uniform flow over an isolated mountain ridge.
</div>

A similar physical picture happens for storm-induced Near-Inertial Waves (NIWs) in the ocean. For a translating storm, such as a tropical cyclone (TC) moving at a speed of 5 m/s, the ocean current is moving uniformly towards the storm in a relative sense. In a storm-relative framework, this moving cyclone acts as a stationary "virtual mountain" to the underlying ocean current flowing toward it. As this storm-relative current reaches the storm inner-core region, it encounters the intense forcing of the storm’s wind stress field. The curl and divergence of the wind stress drive Ekman pumping, creating localized regions of upward and downward motion that effectively deform the ocean's density layers (isopycnals). This deformation serves as a topographic obstacle in the path of the approaching current; as the fluid is forced to navigate this "pressure mountain," it triggers vertical oscillations within the stratified water column. In a rotating ocean, these oscillations project onto the near-inertial frequencies due to the planetary coriolis effect, exciting waves that radiate momentum and energy deep into the ocean interior. Much like atmospheric mountain waves, these storm-induced near-inertial waves (NIWs) exhibit a characteristic vertical tilt—leaning "up-storm" into the relative flow—which is a fundamental requirement for the downward propagation of energy from the surface to the deep sea.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/NIW_img.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    A schematic illustrating NIWs generated by a translating tropical cyclone.
</div>

In fact, this analoge is not just physically similar, the fundamental equations governing these waves are mathamtically similar as well. Specifically, both these two types of waves can be rigorously formulated using the “Taylor Goldstein equation”. The major difference between these two waves is the inclusion of coriolis parameter $f$ in the horizontal momentum equations.
$$
\begin{align*}
\frac{d^2\hat{w}}{dz^2} + (\frac{N^2 \kappa^2}{(\Omega^2 - f^2)} - \kappa^2)\hat{w} &= 0 \qquad \text{for NIWs, } \\
\frac{d^2\hat{w}}{dz^2} + (\frac{N^2 \kappa^2}{\Omega^2} - \kappa^2)\hat{w} &= 0 \qquad \text{for Orographic gravity wave, } 
\end{align*}
$$
where $\hat{w}$ is the Fourier spectrum of vertical velocity, $N^2$ is the static stability parameter, $\kappa=|\vec{k}|^2$ is the magnitude of horizontal wave vector $\vec{k}$, $\Omega=\vec{U} \cdot \vec{k}$ with $U$ being the mean wind velocity.

